The Joe Rogan experience. All right, Nick, this is a,
one of the things that scares people more than anything is
the idea that we're creating something or someone's going to create something
that's going to be smarter than us. It's going to replace us.
Is that something we should really be concerned about?
I presume you're referring to babies,
I'm referring to artificial intelligence. Yes. Well,
it's the big, fair and the big hope, I think both at the same time. Yeah.
How's it. The big hope? Well,
there are a lot of things wrong with the world as it is now called this up to
your face. Um,
all the problems we have, uh,
most of them could be solved if we were smarter or if we
had somebody on our side who are a lot smarter with better technology and so
forth. Um,
also I think if we want to imagine with some really grand future
where humanity or our descendants one day go out and
colonize the universe,
I think that's likely to happen if it's going to happen at all.
After we have superintelligence that then develops the technology to make that
possible.
The real question is whether or not we would be able to harness this
intelligence or whether it would dominate.
Yeah, that certainly is one question I'm not the only,
you could imagine that we harness it,
but then use it for bad purposes as we have a lot of other technologies through
history. So I think there are really two challenges we need to meet. One,
one is to make sure we can align it with human values and then make sure that
we together do something better with it than fighting wars or oppressing one
another.
Well,
when I'm worried about more than anything is that human beings are going to
become obsolete. That we're going to invent something.
That's the next stage of evolution. I'm really concerned with that.
I'm really concerned with, if we look back on ancient hominids, Australia,
pithy guests, just think of some primitive ancestor of man.
We don't want to go back to that. Like that that's a terrible way to live.
I'm worried that what we're creating is the next thing.
I think
we don't necessarily want,
or at least I wouldn't be totally thrilled with,
with a future where humanity as it is now, what's the last and final word,
the PA like ultimate version beyond, right?
I think there's a lot of room for improvement. Sure.
But not anything that is different. It's an improvement. Right? So,
so the key would be,
I think to find some path forward where the best in
us, uh, can continue to exist and develop, uh,
to even greater levels. And maybe at the end of that path,
it looks nothing like we do not. Maybe it's not two legged,
two armed creatures running around with three of thinking matter, right?
It might be something quite different, but as long as it, what we value is,
is present there and ideally in a much higher degree than in the current world,
then that could count as a success.
Yeah. The idea that we're in a state of evolution that we are just like,
we look at ancient hominids that we are eventually going to become something
more advanced or at least more complicated than we are now.
But what I'm worried is that biological life itself has so many limitations.
When we look at the evolution of technology, if you look at Moore's law,
or if you'd just look at new cell phones,
like they just released a new iPhone yesterday,
and they talked about all these incremental increases in the ability to take
photographs and wide angle lenses and night mode and a new chip that works even
faster. These things, there's not the word evolutions incorrect,
but the innovation of technology is so much more rapid than anything we could
ever even imagine. Biologically, like if we had a thing that we'd created,
if we had created, um, instead of artificial intelligence,
in terms of like some something in a chipper computer,
if we created a life form, a biological life form,
but this biological life form was improving radically every year.
Like it didn't even exist. Like the iPhone existed in 2007,
that's when it was invented. If we had something that was 12 years old,
but all of a sudden was infinitely faster and better and smarter and wiser than
it was 12 years ago. The newest version of it, version X one, we would,
we would start going, whoa, we'll pay, hit the brakes on this thing, man. How,
how many more generations before this thing's way smarter than us.
How many more generations before this thing thinks that human beings are
obsolete?
Yeah. It's coffee coming at us faster, but some people think, oh,
it's a slowing down now. Um, who thinks it's slowing down?
Well, don't I have like Tyler Cowen and you, you got an, a, um,
Peter teal sometimes goes on about the pace of innovation and not
really being what it needs to be. Um, I mean,
maybe it was faster in like 1890s or, but,
but still compared to almost all of human history,
it seems like a period of unprecedented rapid progress right now,
unprecedented, I would say so. Yeah. I mean,
except for maybe a couple of decades a hundred years ago when there was a lot of
electricity, the whole thing. Yeah.
No, I agree. Um, I just I'm,
I don't think it's a concern because it's more of a curiosity to me. I mean,
I am concerned, but the more I look at it and go, well,
this is C it seems inevitable that we're going to run into artificial
intelligence, but the questions are so open-ended,
we really don't know when we don't really don't know what form it's going to
take and we really don't know what it's going to do to us.
Yeah. So I, I see it as not something that, um,
should be avoided, uh,
neither something that we should just be completely gung ho about,
but more like a kind of gate through which we will have to pass at some point
all paths that are both possible and lead to really great futures.
I think at some point involve the development of greater than human intelligence
machine intelligence.
And so that our focus should be on getting our act together as much as we can in
whatever period of time we have before that cars prepare
ourselves. Well, I mean, that might involve doing some,
some research into various technical questions.
That's how you build these systems so that we actually understand what they are
doing and they have some, you know, intended impact on the world.
It might also, if, if we are able to get our act together a little bit on,
on the kind of global political scene, um,
a little bit more peace and love in the world would be.
Good. I think it'd be nice. Um.
So, um, and,
and then like reframing from destroying ourselves through some other means
before we even get a chance to try to, uh, needle our way through this, uh,
this game.
Well, that's certainly possible.
And we were certainly capable of screwing it all up is the current state of
technology now in regards to artificial intelligence.
And how far away do you think we are from AGI?
Well, different people have different views on that. I think the, uh,
the truth of the matter is that it's very hard to,
to have accurate views about the timelines for these things that that's,
you know, are still involved, kind of big new breakthroughs that have to happen.
Um, uh, certainly, I mean, over the last eight or 10 years,
there has been a lot of excitement with the deep learning revolution, um,
things that w mean it used to be that people thought of AI as this kind of
autistic savant,
really good at logic and counting and memorizing facts,
but with, with no, no intuition,
and there's this deep learning revolution.
And when you began to do these deep neural networks,
you kind of solved perception in some sense that you
have to have computers that can see that that can hear and that have visual
intuition. Um, so, so, so that,
that doesn't enable the whole wide suite of applications, uh,
which makes it commercially valuable,
which then drives a lot of investment in it, which, you know, there's a,
so there's now quite a lot of momentum, um, uh, in,
in machine learning and, and trying to kind of stay ahead of that. It's.
Interesting that when we think about artificial intelligence and whatever
potential form that is going to take, if you look at films like 2001,
like how like open the door, how, you know,
like we think of something that's communicating to us, like,
like a person would, and maybe is a little bit colder and doesn't,
doesn't share our values and has a more pragmatic view of life
and death and things. But when we think of intelligence though,
I think intelligence,
our mind is almost an extra be connected to all the things that make us human,
like emotions and, and, and ambition and all of these things.
Like the reason why we innovate. Like we,
it's not really clear like why we innovate because we enjoy innovation.
And because we want to make the world a better place.
And because we want to fix some problems that we've created and we want to solve
some limitations of the human body and the environment that we live in,
but we sort of assume that intelligence that we create will also have some
motivations.
Well, there is a fairly large class of possible
structures you could do.
If you want to do anything that has any kind of cognitive or intellectual
capacity at all, a large class of those would be what we might call agents.
So these would be yeah. Systems that interact with the world, um,
in pursuit of some goal. Um,
and if there are a sophisticated class of agents that they can plan ahead to
sequence of actions, like more primitive agents might just have reflexes.
Um, but, but the sophisticated eight on my tab,
a model of the world where it can kind of think ahead before it starts doing
stuff, it can kind of think what,
what would I need to do in order to reach this desired state and then recent
backwards from that. So I think it's a fairly natural,
it's not the only possible cognitive system you could build,
but it's also not this weird, bizarre, special case that, you know,
it's a fairly natural thing to, to infer. If you are able to specify the goal,
something you want to achieve, but you don't know how to achieve it.
The natural way of trying to go about that is by building the system that has
this goal and is an agent, and then moves around and tries different things.
And eventually perhaps learn to, to solve that task. Do you.
Anticipate different types of artificial intelligence,
like artificial intelligence that mimics that the human emotions, like,
do you think,
do you think that people will construct something that's very similar to us in a
way that we can interact with it in common terms?
Or do you think it will be almost like communicating with an alien?
So there are different scenarios here. I mean,
I guess my guess is that the first thing that actually achieved
superintendents would not be very human. Like, um,
there are different possible ways you could try to get to this level of
technology. One would be by trying to reverse engineer the human brain,
but we haven't existed in, in,
in the limit limiting case you might met if you just made an exact duplicate in,
in Silicon of the human brain, like every neuron had some counterpart.
Um, so that, that, that seems technologically very difficult to do,
but it wouldn't require an, a big theoretical breakthrough to do it.
You could just through,
if you had sufficiently good microscopy and large enough computers and in us
elbow grease, you could kind of,
but it seems to me plausible that what will work before we are able to do it
that way will be some more synthetic where, um,
that would only be a very rough resemblance, uh, maybe with the neocortex. Yeah.
That's.
One of the big questions, right?
Whether or not we can replicate all the functions of the human brain in the way
it functions in, in like mimic it exactly.
Or whether we could have some sort of superior method that achieves the same
results that the human brain does in terms of its ability to calculate and
reason and, and do multiple tasks at the same time.
Yeah.
And I also think that maybe once you have a sufficiently high level of this
general form of intellidose,
then you could use that maybe to emulate or mimic things that we
do differently. So maybe we, our cortex is quite limited.
So we rely a lot on earlier neurological structures that we have, we have to,
we have to be guided by emotion because we can't just calculate everything out.
Um, and, and instinct and [inaudible]. And if we lost all of that, we would
be helpless, but maybe some system that had a sufficiently high level of this more abstract reasoning capable that they could maybe use that to substitute for things that weren't built in, in the same way that we do. Have you ever talked to Sam Harris about this? Yeah.
A little bit. Have you ever had a podcast with him? I
, yeah, actually he had him on his podcast a half year ago. I'll have.
To go,
I'll have to listen to it because he has the worst view of the
future in terms of artificial intelligence. He's terrified of it.
And when I talked to him, he terrifies me and Elon Musk is right up there.
He also has a terrifying view of what our artificial intelligence could
potentially be. What do you say to those guys?
Well, I mean,
I do think that that are these significant risks that will be
associated with this transition to the machine intelligence era, um,
including existential risks,
threats to the very survival of humanity or what we care about,
why are we doing this? Well, there are a lot of things we are,
we're doing that may be globally. It would be better if we didn't do. I mean,
why, why do we build thousands of nuclear weapons? Right.
Why do we overfish the ocean? Yeah. So, um, now if I'd actually ask,
why do different individuals work on AI research or why to different
companies and governments funded? I mean, there are a lot of explanation.
It's like a great scientific, uh, endeavor.
If you can make the Google search engine 1% better,
that's gotta be worth like a billion dollars right off the bat. Um,
it's become a kind of prestige thing now where,
where nations want to have some sort of strategy because it's seen as this new
frontier, um, just like when you had, um, you know,
steam engines and industrialization a few hundred years ago,
and then like Tricity,
like it's going to just open up a lot of economic opportunities you want to be
in there where it's you, do you want to be this kind of,
we were going to do subsistence agriculture while the rest of the world is
moving on. Um, so, so there's, there's a lot of,
it's kind of like you could remove some of these reasons and that would still be
not reasons for why people would be pushing forward with this.
One of the things that scares me the most is the idea that if we do create
artificial intelligence,
then it will improve upon our design and create far more sophisticated versions
of itself.
And then it'll continue to do that until it's unrecognizable until it reaches
literally a God-like potential that sup I mean,
I forget what the real numbers were. Maybe you could tell us,
but someone had calculated some reputable source had calculated the
amount of improvement that sentient artificial intelligence would be able to
create inside of a small window of time.
Like if it was allowed to innovate and then make better versions of itself.
And those better versions of itself were allowed to innovate and make better
versions of itself.
You're talking about not an exponential increase of intelligence,
but an explosion.
W w w we don't know. So
it's hard enough to forecast the pace at which we will make
advances in AI,
because we just don't know how hard the problems are that we haven't yet solved.
Right. And, you know, once you get to human level or a little bit above, I mean,
who knows it could be that there is some level of where to get further.
You need to put in a lot of thinking time to kind of get there. Now,
what is easier to estimate is if you just look at the speed,
because that's just a function of the hardware that you're running it on. Right?
So, so there, we know that there is a lot of room in principle.
If you look at the physics of computation and you look at what would an
optimally arranged physical system be, and that was optimized for computation,
that it would be like way many, many orders above what we can do now. Um,
and that then you could have arbitrarily large systems like that. So, um, from,
from that point of view,
we know that that could be things that wouldn't be like a million times faster
than the human brain and, and with a lot more memory and stuff like that. D.
And then something,
if it did have a million times more power than the human brain,
it could create something with a million times more compute,
computational power than itself. It could make better versions.
It could continue to innovate. Like if we create something that we,
and we say you are mean it is sentient,
it is artificial intelligence. Now please go innovate,
please go follow the same directive and improve upon your design.
Yeah. Well, w we don't know how,
how long that would take then to get to something. I mean,
we already have sort of millions of times more thinking capacity
than a human has. I mean, we have millions of humans, right. Um,
so if you kind of break it down,
you think there's like one milestone when you have maybe an AI that could do
what one human can do,
but then that might still be quite a lot of orders of magnitude, uh, you know,
until it would be equivalent of the whole human species. Um,
and maybe during that time, other things happen, maybe we upgrade, you know,
our own abilities in some way. So there,
there are some scenarios where it's so hard to get,
even to one human baseline that we kind of use this
massive amount of resources just to barely create kind of, you know,
villages, uh, using billions of dollars of compute. Right.
So if that's the way we get there, then, I mean,
it might take quite a while because you can't easily scale something that you've
already spent billions of dollars building.
Yeah.
Some people think the whole thing is blown out of proportion that we're so far
away from creating artificial general intelligence that resembles human beings,
that it's all just vaporware. What do you say to those people?
Uh, well, I mean, one,
one would be that I would want to be more precise about just how far away does
it have to be in order for us to be rational, to ignore it.
It might be that if something is sufficiently important and high stakes than
even if it's not going to happen in the next 5, 10, 20, 30 years,
it might still be wise for, you know,
our pool of 7 billion plus people to have some people actually thinking
about this ahead of time. So some of these disagreements,
I guess this is my point are, are more apparent than real.
Like there's some people say it's going to happen soon on some other people say,
no, it's not going to happen for a long time. And then,
you know what one person means by soon five years.
And another person means by a long time, five years, and, you know,
it's more of different attitudes rather than different specific beliefs. So,
so I would first want to make sure that there actually is a disagreement. Um,
now if there is,
if somebody is very confident that it's not going to happen in hundreds and
hundreds of years, that I guess I would want to know the reasons for,
for that level of confidence, what what's,
what's the evidence they're looking at, uh, you know,
do they have some ground for, for being very sure about this,
that certainly the history of technology prediction is not that great. Um,
you can find a lot of other examples where even very eminent technologists and
scientists were culture,
it's not going to happen in our lifetime or nothing like it. In some cases,
it actually already just happened in some other parts of the world,
or it happened a year or two later. So I think some,
some epistemic humility with these things. So it would be a Y.